<!--
id:duserrnd
category:Signal Generators:Random (Noise) Generators
-->
# duserrnd
Discrete USER-defined-distribution RaNDom generator.

## Syntax
``` csound-orc
aout duserrnd ktableNum
iout duserrnd itableNum
kout duserrnd ktableNum
```

### Initialization

_itableNum_ -- number of table containing the random-distribution function.  Such table is generated by the user. See [GEN40](../../scoregens/gen40), [GEN41](../../scoregens/gen41), and [GEN42](../../scoregens/gen42). The table length does not need to be a power of 2

### Performance

_ktableNum_ -- number of table containing the random-distribution function.  Such table is generated by the user. See [GEN40](../../scoregens/gen40), [GEN41](../../scoregens/gen41), and [GEN42](../../scoregens/gen42). The table length does not need to be a power of 2

_duserrnd_ (discrete user-defined-distribution random generator) generates random values according to a discrete random distribution created by the user. The user can create the discrete distribution histogram by using [GEN41](../../scoregens/gen41). In order to create that table, the user has to define an arbitrary amount of number pairs, the first number of each pair representing a value and the second representing its probability (see [GEN41](../../scoregens/gen41) for more details).

When used  as a function, the rate of generation depends by the rate type of input variable XtableNum. In this case it can be embedded into any formula. Table number can be varied at k-rate, allowing to change the distribution histogram during the performance of a single note. _duserrnd_ is designed be used in algorithmic music generation.

_duserrnd_ can also be used to generate values following a set of ranges of probabilities by using distribution functions generated by GEN42 (See [GEN42](../../scoregens/gen42) for more details). In this case, in order to simulate continuous ranges, the length of table XtableNum should be reasonably big, as _duserrnd_ does not interpolate between table elements.

For a tutorial about random distribution histograms and functions see:

*   D. Lorrain. "A panoply of stochastic cannons". In C. Roads, ed. 1989. Music machine. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT press, pp. 351 - 379.

## Examples

Here is an example of the duserrnd opcode. It uses the file [duserrnd.csd](../../examples/duserrnd.csd).

``` csound-orc title="Example of the duserrnd opcode." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/duserrnd.csd"
```

Its output should include lines like these:

```
i   1 time     0.00067:     8.00000
i   1 time     0.00133:     8.00000
i   1 time     0.00200:     8.00000
i   1 time     0.00267:     8.00000
i   1 time     0.00333:     2.00000
i   1 time     0.00400:     8.00000
i   1 time     0.00533:     8.00000
i   1 time     0.00600:     8.00000
..........
```

## See also

[Random (Noise) Generators](../../siggen/random)

## Credits

Author: Gabriel Maldonado

New in Version 4.16
