<!--
id:ficlose
category:Signal I/O:File I/O
-->
# ficlose
Closes a previously opened file.

## Syntax
``` csound-orc
ficlose ihandle
ficlose Sfilename
```

### Initialization

_ihandle_ -- a number which identifies this file (generated by a previous [fiopen](../../opcodes/fiopen)).

_Sfilename_ -- A string in double quotes or string variable with the filename. The full path must be given if the file directory is not in the system PATH and is not present in the current directory.

### Performance

_ficlose_ closes a file which was previously opened with [fiopen](../../opcodes/fiopen). _ficlose_ is only needed if you need to read a file written to during the same csound performance, since only when csound ends a performance does it close and save data in all open files. The opcode _ficlose_ is useful for instance if you want to save presets within files which you want to be accesible without having to terminate csound.

> :memo: **Note**
>
> If you do not need this functionality it is safer not to call _ficlose_, and just let csound close the files when it exits.

If a files closed with _ficlose_ is being accessed by another opcode (like [fout](../../opcodes/fout) or [foutk](../../opcodes/foutk)), it will be closed later when it is no longer being used.

> :warning: **Warning**
>
> This opcode should be used with care, as the file handle will become invalid, and will cause an init error when an opcode tries to access the closed file.

## Examples

Here is an example of the ficlose opcode. It uses the file [ficlose.csd](../../examples/ficlose.csd).

``` csound-csd title="Example of the ficlose opcode." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/ficlose.csd"
```

## See also

[File Input and Output](../../sigio/fileio)

## Credits

Author: Gabriel Maldonado<br>
Italy<br>
1999<br>

New in Csound version 5.02
