<!--
id:fini
category:Signal I/O:File I/O
-->
# fini
Read signals from a file at i-rate.

## Syntax
``` csound-orc
fini ifilename, iskipframes, iformat, in1 [, in2] [, in3] [, ...]
```

### Initialization

_ifilename_ -- input file name (can be a string or a handle number generated by [fiopen](../../opcodes/fiopen))

_iskipframes_ -- number of frames to skip at the start (every frame contains a sample of each channel)

_iformat_ -- a number specifying the input file format. If a header is found, this argument is ignored.

*  0 - floating points in text format (loop; see below)
*  1 - floating points in text format (no loop; see below)
*  2 - 32 bit floating points in binary format (no loop)

### Performance

_fini_ is the complement of [fouti](../../opcodes/fouti) and [foutir](../../opcodes/foutir). It reads the  values each time the corresponding instrument note is activated. When _iformat_ is set to 0 and the end of file is reached, the file pointer is zeroed. This restarts the scan from the beginning. When _iformat_ is set to 1 or 2, no looping is enabled and at the end of file the corresponding variables will be filled with zeroes.

> :memo: **Note**
>
> Please note that since this opcode generates its output using input parameters (on the right side of the opcode), these variables must be initialized before use, otherwise a 'used before defined' error will occur. You can use the [init](../../opcodes/init) opcode for this.

## Examples

Here is an example of the fini opcode. It uses the file [fini.csd](../../examples/fini.csd).

``` csound-csd title="Example of the fini opcode." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/fini.csd"
```

## See also

[File Input and Output](../../sigio/fileio)

## Credits

Author: Gabriel Maldonado<br>
Italy<br>
1999<br>

New in Csound version 3.56
