<!--
id:fof2
category:Signal Generators:Granular Synthesis
-->
# fof2
Produces sinusoid bursts including k-rate incremental indexing with each successive burst.

Audio output is a succession of sinusoid bursts initiated at frequency _xfund_ with a spectral peak at _xform_. For _xfund_ above 25 Hz these bursts produce a speech-like formant with spectral characteristics determined by the k-input parameters. For lower fundamentals this generator provides a special form of granular synthesis.

_fof2_ implements k-rate incremental indexing into _ifna_ function with each successive burst.

## Syntax
``` csound-orc
ares fof2 xamp, xfund, xform, koct, kband, kris, kdur, kdec, iolaps, \
          ifna, ifnb, itotdur, kphs, kgliss [, iskip]
```

### Initialization

_iolaps_ -- number of preallocated spaces needed to hold overlapping burst data. Overlaps are frequency dependent, and the space required depends on the maximum value of _xfund * kdur_. Can be over-estimated at no computation cost. Uses less than 50 bytes of memory per _iolap_.

_ifna, ifnb_ -- table numbers of two stored functions. The first is a sine table for sineburst synthesis (size of at least 4096 recommended). The second is a rise shape, used forwards and backwards to shape the sineburst rise and decay; this may be linear ([GEN07](../../scoregens/gen07)) or perhaps a sigmoid ([GEN19](../../scoregens/gen19)).

_itotdur_ -- total time during which this _fof_ will be active. Normally set to p3. No new sineburst is created if it cannot complete its _kdur_ within the remaining _itotdur_.

_iskip_ (optional, default=0) -- If non-zero, skip initialization (allows legato use).

### Performance

_xamp_ -- peak amplitude of each sineburst, observed at the true end of its rise pattern. The rise may exceed this value given a large bandwidth (say, Q &lt; 10) and/or when the bursts are overlapping.

_xfund_ -- the fundamental frequency (in Hertz) of the impulses that create new sinebursts.

_xform_ -- the formant frequency, i.e. freq of the sinusoid burst induced by each _xfund_ impulse. This frequency can be fixed for each burst or can vary continuously.

_koct_ -- octaviation index, normally zero. If greater than zero, lowers the effective _xfund_ frequency by attenuating odd-numbered sinebursts. Whole numbers are full octaves, fractions transitional.

_kband_ -- the formant bandwidth (at -6dB), expressed in Hz. The bandwidth determines the rate of exponential decay throughout the sineburst, before the enveloping described below is applied.

_kris, kdur, kdec_ -- rise, overall duration, and decay times (in seconds) of the sinusoid burst. These values apply an enveloped duration to each burst, in similar fashion to a Csound _linen_ generator but with rise and decay shapes derived from the _ifnb_ input. _kris_ inversely determines the skirtwidth (at -40 dB) of the induced formant region. _kdur_ affects the density of sineburst overlaps, and thus the speed of computation. Typical values for vocal imitation are .003,.02,.007.

_kphs_ -- allows k-rate indexing of function table _ifna_ with each successive burst, making it suitable for time-warping applications. Values of _kphs_ are normalized from 0 to 1, 1 being the end of the function table _ifna_.

_kgliss_ -- sets the end pitch of each grain relative to the initial pitch, in octaves. Thus _kgliss_ = 2 means that the grain ends two octaves above its initial pitch, while _kgliss_ = -3/4 has the grain ending a major sixth below. Each 1/12 added to _kgliss_ raises the ending frequency one half-step.  If you want no glissando, set _kgliss_ to 0.

Csound's [fof](../../opcodes/fof) generator is loosely based on Michael Clarke's C-coding of IRCAM's _CHANT_ program (Xavier Rodet et al.). Each _fof_ produces a single formant, and the output of four or more of these can be summed to produce a rich vocal imitation. _fof_ synthesis is a special form of granular synthesis, and this implementation aids transformation between vocal imitation and granular textures. Computation speed depends on _kdur, xfund_, and the density of any overlaps.

> :memo: **Note**
>
> The ending frequency of any grain is equal to _kform_ * (2 ^ _kgliss_), so setting _kgliss_ too high may result in aliasing.  For example, _kform_ = 3000 and _kgliss_ = 3 places the ending frequency over the Nyquist if _sr_ = 44100.  It is a good idea to scale _kgliss_ accordingly.

## Examples

Here is an example of the fof2 opcode. It uses the file [fof2.csd](../../examples/fof2.csd).

``` csound-orc title="Example of the fof2 opcode." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/fof2.csd"
```

Here is another example of the fof2 opcode, which generates vowel tones using formants generated by fof2 coinciding with values from the [Formant Values](../../misc/formants) appendix. It uses the file [fof2-2.csd](../../examples/fof2-2.csd).

``` csound-orc title="Example of the fof2 opcode to produce vowel sounds." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/fof2-2.csd"
```

## See Also

[Granular Synthesis](../../siggen/granular)

## Credits

Author: Rasmus Ekman<br>
_fof2_ is a modification of _fof_ by Rasmus Ekman<br>

New in Csound 3.45
