<!--
id:foutk
category:Signal I/O:File I/O
-->
# foutk
Outputs k-rate signals of an arbitrary number of channels to a specified file, in raw (headerless) format.

## Syntax
``` csound-orc
foutk ifilename, iformat, kout1 [, kout2, kout3,....,koutN]
```

### Initialization

_ifilename_ -- the output file's name (in double-quotes).

_iformat_ -- a flag to choose output file format (note: Csound versions older than 5.0 may only support formats 0 and 1):

*  0 - 32-bit floating point samples without header (binary PCM multichannel file)
*  1 - 16-bit integers without header (binary PCM multichannel file)
*  2 - 16-bit integers without header (binary PCM multichannel file)
*  3 - u-law samples without header
*  4 - 16-bit integers without header
*  5 - 32-bit integers without header
*  6 - 32-bit floats without header
*  7 - 8-bit unsigned integers without header
*  8 - 24-bit integers without header
*  9 - 64-bit floats without header

### Performance

_kout1,...koutN_ -- control-rate signals to be written to the file. The expected range of the signals is determined by the selected sample format.

_foutk_ operates in the same way as [fout](../../opcodes/fout), but with k-rate signals. _iformat_ can be set only in the range 0 to 9, or 0 to 1 with an old version of Csound.

Notice that [fout](../../opcodes/fout) and _foutk_ can use either a string containing a file pathname, or a handle-number generated by [fiopen](../../opcodes/fiopen). Whereas, with [fouti](../../opcodes/fouti) and [foutir](../../opcodes/foutir), the target file can be only specified by means of a handle-number.

## Examples

Here is an example of the foutk opcode. It uses the file [foutk.csd](../../examples/foutk.csd).

``` csound-csd title="Example of the foutk opcode." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/foutk.csd"
```

To avoid zipper noise, by discontinuities produced from complex envelope tracking, a lowpass filter could be used, to smooth the estimated envelope.

## See also

[File Input and Output](../../sigio/fileio)

## Credits

Author: Gabriel Maldonado<br>
Italy<br>
1999<br>

New in Csound version 3.56
