<!--
id:foutir
category:Signal I/O:File I/O
-->
# foutir
Outputs i-rate signals from an arbitrary number of channels to a specified file.

## Syntax
``` csound-orc
foutir ihandle, iformat, iflag, iout1 [, iout2, iout3,....,ioutN]
```

### Initialization

_ihandle_ -- a number which specifies this file.

_iformat_ -- a flag to choose output file format:

*  0 - floating point in text format
*  1 - 32-bit floating point in binary format

_iflag_ -- choose the mode of writing to the ASCII file (valid only in ASCII mode; in binary mode _iflag_ has no meaning, but it must be present anyway). _iflag_ can be a value chosen among the following:

*  0 - line of text without instrument prefix
*  1 - line of text with instrument prefix (see below)
*  2 - reset the time of instrument prefixes to zero (to be used only in some particular cases. See below)

_iout,..., ioutN_ -- values to be written to the file

### Performance

[fouti](../../opcodes/fouti) and _foutir_ write i-rate values to a file. The main use of these opcodes is to generate a score file during a realtime session. For this purpose, the user should set _iformat_ to 0 (text file output) and _iflag_ to 1, which enable the output of a prefix consisting of the strings _inum_, _actiontime_, and _duration_, before the values of _iout1...ioutN_ arguments. The arguments in the prefix refer to instrument number, action time and duration of current note.

The difference between [fouti](../../opcodes/fouti) and _foutir_ is that, in the case of _fouti_, when _iflag_ is set to 1, the duration of the first opcode is undefined (so it is replaced by a dot). Whereas, _foutir_ is defined at the end of note, so the corresponding text line is written only at the end of the current note (in order to recognize its duration). The corresponding file is linked by the _ihandle_ value generated by the [fiopen](../../opcodes/fiopen) opcode. So _fouti_ and _foutir_ can be used to generate a Csound score while playing  a realtime session.

Notice that [fout](../../opcodes/fout) and [foutk](../../opcodes/foutk) can use either a string containing a file pathname, or a handle-number generated by [fiopen](../../opcodes/fiopen). Whereas, with [fouti](../../opcodes/fouti) and _foutir_, the target file can be only specified by means of a handle-number.

## Examples

Here is an example of the foutir opcode. It uses the file [foutir.csd](../../examples/foutir.csd)and creates a list "foutir.sco". It can be used as a score file.

``` csound-csd title="Example of the foutir opcode." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/foutir.csd"
```

## See also

[File Input and Output](../../sigio/fileio)

## Credits

Author: Gabriel Maldonado<br>
Italy<br>
1999<br>

New in Csound version 3.56
