<!--
id:gendyc
category:Signal Generators:Models and Emulations
-->
# gendyc
Dynamic stochastic approach to waveform synthesis using cubic interpolation.

Implementation with cubic interpolation of the _Génération Dynamique Stochastique_ (GENDYN), a dynamic stochastic approach to waveform synthesis conceived by Iannis Xenakis.

## Syntax
``` csound-orc
ares gendyc kamp, kampdist, kdurdist, kadpar, kddpar, kminfreq, kmaxfreq, \
            kampscl, kdurscl [, initcps] [, knum]
kres gendyc kamp, kampdist, kdurdist, kadpar, kddpar, kminfreq, kmaxfreq, \
            kampscl, kdurscl [, initcps] [, knum]
```

### Initialization

_initcps_ (optional, default=12) -- max number of control points.

### Performance

_kamp_ -- amplitude.

_kampdist_ -- choice of probability distribution for the next perturbation of the amplitude of a control point. The valid distributions are:

* 0 - LINEAR
* 1 - CAUCHY
* 2 - LOGIST
* 3 - HYPERBCOS
* 4 - ARCSINE
* 5 - EXPON
* 6 - SINUS (external k-rate signal)

If _kampdist_=6, the user can use an external k-rate signal through _kadpar_.

_kdurdist_ -- choice of distribution for the perturbation of the current inter control point duration. See _kampdist_ for the valid distributions. If _kdurdist_=6, the user can use an external k-rate signal through _kddpar_.

_kadpar_ -- parameter for the _kampdist_ distribution. Should be in the range of 0.0001 to 1.

_kddpar_ -- parameter for the _kdurdist_ distribution. Should be in the range of 0.0001 to 1.

_kminfreq_ -- minimum allowed frequency of oscillation.

_kmaxfreq_ -- maximum allowed frequency of oscillation.

_kampscl_ -- multiplier for the distribution's delta value for amplitude (1.0 is full range).

_kdurscl_ -- multiplier for the distribution's delta value for duration.

_knum_ (optional, default=_initcps_) -- current number of utilized control points.

The waveform is generated by _knum_ - 1 segments and is repeated in the time. The vertexes (control points) are moved according to a stochastic action and they are limited within the boundaries of a mirror formed by an amplitude barrier and a time barrier.

## Examples

Here is an example of the gendyc opcode. It uses the file
[gendyc.csd](../../examples/gendyc.csd).

``` csound-orc title="Example of the gendyc opcode." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/gendyc.csd"
```

References

1.   Formalized Music (1992, Stuyvesant, NY: Pendragon Press), pp. 246 - 254, 289 - 322.

## See Also

[Models and Emulations](../../siggen/models), [gendy](../../opcodes/gendy), [gendyx](../../opcodes/gendyx)

## Credits

Based on Nick Collins's Gendy1 and Bhob Rainey's Gendy4 (SuperCollider)<br>
Author: Tito Latini<br>
January 2012<br>

New in Csound version 5.16
