<!--
id:sfinstr
category:Signal Generators:Sample Playback
-->
# sfinstr
Plays a SoundFont2 (SF2) sample instrument, generating a stereo sound.

These opcodes allow management the sample-structure of SF2 files. In order to understand the usage of these opcodes, the user must have some knowledge of the SF2 format, so a brief description of this format can be found in the [SoundFont2 File Format](../../siggen/sample) section.

## Syntax
``` csound-orc
ar1, ar2 sfinstr ivel, inotenum, xamp, xfreq, instrnum, ifilhandle \
                 [, iflag] [, ioffset]
```

### Initialization

_ivel_ -- velocity value

_inotenum_ -- MIDI note number value

_instrnum_ -- number of an instrument of a SF2 file.

_ifilhandle_ -- unique number generated by _sfload_ opcode to be used as an identifier for a SF2 file. Several SF2 files can be loaded and activated at the same time.

_iflag_ (optional) -- flag regarding the behavior of _xfreq_ and _inotenum_

_ioffset_ (optional) -- start playing at offset, in samples.

### Performance

_xamp_ -- amplitude correction factor

_xfreq_ -- frequency value or frequency multiplier, depending by _iflag_. When _iflag_ = 0, _xfreq_ is a multiplier of a the default frequency, assigned by SF2 preset to the _inotenum_ value. When _iflag_ = 1, _xfreq_ is the absolute frequency of the output sound, in Hz. Default is 0.

When _iflag_ = 0, _inotenum_ sets the frequency of the output according to the MIDI note number used, and _xfreq_ is used as a multiplier. When _iflag_ = 1, the frequency of the output, is set directly by _xfreq_. This allows the user to use any kind of micro-tuning based scales. However, this method is designed to work correctly only with presets tuned to the default equal temperament. Attempts to use this method with a preset already having non-standard tunings, or with drum-kit-based presets, could give unexpected results.

Adjustment of the amplitude can be done by varying the _xamp_ argument, which acts as a multiplier.

The _ioffset_ parameter allows the sound to start from a sample different than the first one. The user should make sure that its value is within the length of the specific sound. Otherwise, Csound will probably crash.

_sfinstr_ plays an SF2 instrument instead of a preset (an SF2 instrument is the base of a preset layer). _instrnum_ specifies the instrument number, and the user must be sure that the specified number belongs to an existing instrument of a determinate soundfont bank. Notice that both _xamp_ and _xfreq_ can operate at k-rate as well as a-rate, but both arguments must work at the same rate.

These opcodes only support the sample structure of SF2 files. The modulator structure of the SoundFont2 format is not supported in Csound. Any modulation or processing to the sample data is left to the Csound user, bypassing all restrictions forced by the SF2 standard.

## Examples

Here is an example of the sfinstr opcode. It uses the file [sfinstr.csd](../../examples/sfinstr.csd).

``` csound-csd title="Example of the sfinstr opcode." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/sfinstr.csd"
```

## See also

[Soundfonts](../../siggen/sample)

More information on soundfonts is in the Floss Manuals: [https://flossmanual.csound.com/midi/reading-midi-files](https://flossmanual.csound.com/midi/reading-midi-files)

For other information on soundfonts look in the Wikipedia: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soundfont](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soundfont)

## Credits

Author: Gabriel Maldonado<br>
Italy<br>
May 2000<br>

New in Csound Version 4.07
