<!--
id:tablexkt
category:Table Control:Dynamic Selection
-->
# tablexkt
Reads function tables with linear, cubic, or sinc interpolation.

## Syntax
``` csound-orc
ares tablexkt xndx, kfn, kwarp, iwsize [, ixmode] [, ixoff] [, iwrap]
```

### Initialization

_iwsize_ -- This parameter controls the type of interpolation to be used:

*  _2:_ Use linear interpolation. This is the lowest quality, but also the fastest mode.
*  _4:_ Cubic interpolation. Slightly better quality than iwsize = 2, at the expense of being somewhat slower.
*  _8 and above (up to 1024):_ sinc interpolation with window size set to iwsize (should be an integer multiply of 4). Better quality than linear or cubic interpolation, but very slow. When transposing up, a kwarp value above 1 can be used for anti-aliasing (this is even slower).

_ixmode1_ (optional) -- index data mode. The default value is 0.

*  _0:_ raw index
*  _any non-zero value:_ normalized (0 to 1)

> :memo: **Notes**
>
> If _tablexkt_ is used to play back samples with looping (e.g.  table index is generated by lphasor), there must be at least iwsize / 2 extra samples after the loop end point for interpolation, otherwise audible clicking may occur (also, at least iwsize / 2 samples should be before the loop start point).

_ixoff_ (optional) -- amount by which index is to be offset. For a table with origin at center, use tablesize / 2 (raw) or 0.5 (normalized). The default value is 0.

_iwrap_ (optional) -- wraparound index flag. The default value is 0.

*  _0:_ Nowrap (index &lt; 0 treated as index = 0; index &gt;= tablesize (or 1.0 in normalized mode) sticks at the guard point).
*  _any non-zero value:_ Index is wrapped to the allowed range (not including the guard point in this case).

> :memo: **Note**
>
> _iwrap_ also applies to extra samples for interpolation.

### Performance

_ares_ -- audio output

_xndx_ -- table index

_kfn_ -- function table number

_kwarp_ -- if greater than 1, use sin (x / kwarp) / x function for sinc interpolation, instead of the default sin (x) / x. This is useful to avoid aliasing when transposing up (_kwarp_ should be set to the transpose factor in this case, e.g. 2.0 for one octave), however it makes rendering up to twice as slow. Also, _iwsize_ should be at least kwarp * 8. This feature is experimental, and may be optimized both in terms of speed and quality in new versions.

> :memo: **Note**
>
> _kwarp_ has no effect if it is less than, or equal to 1, or linear or cubic interpolation is used.

## Examples

Here is an example of the tablexkt opcode. It uses the file [tablexkt.csd](../../examples/tablexkt.csd).

``` csound-csd title="Example of the tablexkt opcode." linenums="1"
--8<-- "examples/tablexkt.csd"
```

## See also

[Table Reading with Dynamic Selection](../../table/select)

## Credits

Author: Istvan Varga<br>
January 2002<br>
Example by: Jonathan Murphy 2006<br>

New in version 4.18
